 
                   Domestic Water Quantity, Service, Level and Health  
© World Health Organization 2003 
The illustration of the cover page is extracted from Rescue Mission: Planet Earth, © Peace Child 
International 1994; used by permission 
 
All rights reserved. 
 
Publications of the World Health Organization can be obtained from Marketing and Dissemination, World 
Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel: +41 22 791 2476; fax: +41 22 
791 4857; email: bookorders@who.int ). Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO 
publications – whether for sale or for noncommercial distribution – should be addressed to Publications, at the above address (fax: +41 22 791 4806; email: permissions@who.int
). The designations employed and 
the presentation of the material in this publication do  not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever 
on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitati on of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps 
represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement. 
The mention of specific companies or of certain manuf acturers’ products does not imply that they are 
endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that 
are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by 
initial capital letters. 
 
The World Health Organization does not warrant that the information contained in this publication is 
complete and correct and shall not be liable for any damages incurred as a result of its use. 
 WHO/SDE/WSH/03.02
English only
Domestic Water Quantity,
Service Level and Health
Authors:
Guy Howard
Programme Manager, Water Engineering and Development Centre,
Loughborough University, UK
Jamie Bartram
Co-ordinator, Water, Sanitation and Health Programme, World Health
Organization, Geneva, SwitzerlandExecutive summary
The quantity of water delivered and used for households is an important aspect of
domestic water supplies, which influences hygiene and therefore public health. To date,
WHO has not provided guidance on the quantity of domestic water that is required to
promote good health. This paper reviews the requirements for water for health-related
purposes to derive a figure of an acceptable minimum to meet the needs for consumption
(hydration and food preparation) and basic hygiene.
Based on estimates of requirements of lactating women who engage in moderate physical
activity in above-average temperatures, a minimum of 7.5 litres per capita per day will
meet the requirements of most people under most conditions. This water needs to be of
a quality that represents a tolerable level of risk.  This volume does not account for health
and well-being-related demands outside normal domestic use such as water use in health
care facilities, food production, economic activity or amenity use.
The basic need for water includes water used for personal hygiene, but defining a
minimum has limited significance as the volume of water used by households depends
on accessibility as determined primarily by distance and time, but also including
reliability and potentially cost. Accessibility can be categorised in terms of service level.
A summary of the degree to which different levels of service will meet requirements to
sustain good health and interventions required to ensure health gains are maximised is
shown in table S1  below.
Table S1: Summary of requirement for water service level to promote health
Service level Access measure
Needs metLevel of health
concern
No access (quantity
collected often
below 5 l/c/d)More than 1000m or
30 minutes total
collection timeConsumption – cannot be assured
Hygiene – not possible (unless
practised at source)Very high
Basic access
(average quantity
unlikely to exceed
20 l/c/d)Between 100 and
1000m or 5 to 30
minutes total
collection timeConsumption – should be assured
Hygiene – handwashing and basic food
hygiene possible; laundry/
bathing difficult to assure unless
carried out at sourceHigh
Intermediate access
(average quantity
about 50 l/c/d)Water delivered
through one tap on-
plot (or within 100m
or 5 minutes total
collection timeConsumption – assured
Hygiene – all basic personal and food
hygiene assured; laundry and bathing
should also be assuredLow
Optimal access
(average quantity
100 l/c/d and
above)Water supplied
through multiple taps
continuouslyConsumption – all needs met
Hygiene – all needs should be metVery low
Table S1 indicates the likely quantity of water that will be collected at different levels of
service.  The estimated quantities of water at each level may reduce where water supplies
are intermittent and the risks of ingress of contaminated water into domestic water
supplies will increase. Where optimal access is achieved, but the supply is intermittent,a further risk to health may result from the compromised functioning of waterborne
sanitation systems.
The public health gains derived from use of increased volumes of water typically occur
in two major increments. The first relates to overcoming a lack of basic access, where the
distances and time involved in water collection result in use of volumes inadequate to
support basic personal hygiene and may be marginally adequate for human consumption.
Further significant health gains occur largely when water is available at household level.
Other benefits derived from the second step in improving access include increased time
for example, child-care and food preparation and productive activity. Health gains
derived from increased access between these two major steps appear limited, although
other gains in relation to increased time for activities such as child-care, food preparation
and productive activity (including education) may be significant and progressive. Further
incremental improvements may also occur at higher levels of service, associated with
further increased access and drinking-water quality control, but also linked to improved
socio-economic status.
Where the basic access service level has not been achieved, hygiene cannot be assured
and consumption requirements may be at risk. Therefore providing a basic level of access
is the highest priority for the water and health sectors. 
Within the population served by basic levels of service, public health gains are primarily
achieved through providing protected water sources, promoting good water handling
hygiene practices and household treatment of water and in other key hygiene behaviours
(notably hand and face washing) at critical times.
The categories of service level can also been understood in terms of household water
security, although a full description of this would also require estimates of quality and
safety. The group with no access have no household water security. The group with basic
access could be described as having partial household water security, with the remaining
groups described as having sustained household water security, dependent on the quality
of water supplied.
The service level categories shown in table 1 should be compared with data concerning
estimates of present level of coverage by service level as summarised in table S2 (WHO
and UNICEF, 2000)1. These figures show that there remains a significant proportion of
the world’s population (18%) without access to an improved water supply within one
kilometre of their dwelling and that 53% do not have access to an intermediate level of
service as defined in table S1.
The figures for access to an intermediate level of service of water are lower than for
sanitation (60%), for which definitions for reasonable access were all related to
household or near-household levels of service. Currently there is, justifiably, significant
advocacy to reduce the sanitation access deficit, however, this evidence suggests that to
                                                
1 Improved water supplies were: household connection, public standpipe, borehole, protected dug well,
protected spring and rainwater collection.. Unimproved water supplies were: unprotected well,
unprotected spring, vendor-provided water, bottled water, tanker truck provisionmeet a more health-centred definition of access to improved water supply, equal attention
is required for improvement in both water supply and sanitation. 
Table S2 : Water supply access data for 1990 and 2000 by no access, access to
improved sources and piped supply  (from WHO and UNICEF, 2001)
Year No access
(millions)Access to improved sources
within 1 kilometer (millions)Access through household
connections (millions)
1990 22%
(1169)78%
(4086)43%
(2255)
2000 18%
(1069)82%
(4988)52%
(3169)
The right to water exists at the level of the individual and implies access to the minimum
necessary for basic needs. Progress towards universal achievement of this level of service
is associated with substantial health gain and remains a focus on international policy
initiatives through the Millennium Declaration Goals and of monitoring activities through
the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme.
Where achievement of full access to a basic level of service has not been achieved, policy
initiatives should address increasing the numbers of households with this level of service.
 Maximum health benefits are likely to be obtained by directing resources towards
ensuring that all households have access to improved water sources, and in some
circumstances in directly upgrading to access at household level (generally through piped
means). Significant gains are also likely to be achieved by upgrading of those with access
to improved sources to household level access. In contrast increasing ease of access to
improved sources outside the household is likely to provide limited health returns.
Assessment of progress towards this level of access should be a target of policy in all
countries and in particular where basic needs have been met. Health and other benefits
from improved water supply are significantly greater when there is a supply of
continuous access to safe drinking water within the home, a level of service that can be
defined as optimal.
In practice, the use of water for domestic purposes cannot easily be distinguished from
productive use at the household level, particularly among poor urban communities.
Domestic water use to sustain livelihoods among the poor forms an integral part of
household coping strategies. There may also be important health and social gains from
ensuring adequate quality of service to support small-scale productive use,  for example
where this involves food production. Access to water adequate for small-scale productive
activity in such areas is therefore important as part of poverty alleviation and may deliver
significant indirect health benefits as a result.1 Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 1
2 Defining domestic water supply ................................ ................................ .................. 2
3 Consumption ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 3
3.1 Basic hydration requirements ................................ ................................ .................. 3
3.2 Published Reference Values ................................ ................................ .................... 4
3.3 Specific population groups ................................ ................................ ....................... 5
3.5 Hydration needs: types of fluid intake required ................................ .................... 7
3.6 Quality of water for consumption ................................ ................................ ........... 8
3.7 Quantities of water required for cooking ................................ ............................... 8
4 Water quantity requirements for hygiene ................................ ................................ 9
4.1 The links between water supply, hygiene and disease ................................ ......10
4.2  Relationships between water, sanitation hygiene and diarrhoea ..................... 10
4.3 Relationships between water, hygiene and other infectious diseases .............. 15
4.4 Minimum quantity of water required for effective hygiene .............................. 16
4.6 Quantity and accessibility: how much do people use and what are the
links?   ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 17
4.7 Quantity and cost: what influence does this have on use? ................................ 19
4.8 Other factors that may affect quantities of water used ................................ ......20
4.9 Laundry: on and off-plot use ................................ ................................ ................ 21
4.10 Minimum requirements for all hygiene needs ................................ .................. 22
5 Other Uses of water and links to quantity ................................ ............................. 23
5.1 Household productive uses of domestic water ................................ ....................... 23
5.2Amenity  uses of water ................................ ................................ ............................... 24
6 Implications ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 24
6.1 Changing the nature of the debate: household water security/access not
quantity ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 24
6.2 International Development Targets ................................ ................................ ......25
6.3 Global Assessment ................................ ................................ ................................ .26
6.4 Emergencies and disasters ................................ ................................ .................... 27
6.5 Quantity in health-based surveillance programmes ................................ ........... 27
7 Acknowledgements ................................ ................................ ................................ .....28
8 References ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 281Domestic water quantity, service level and health
1 Introduction
Domestic water supplies are one of the fundamental requirements for human life. Without
water, life cannot be sustained beyond a few days and the lack of access to adequate water
supplies leads to the spread of disease. Children bear the greatest health burden associated
with poor water and sanitation. Diarrhoeal diseases attributed to poor water supply, sanitation
and hygiene account for 1.73  million deaths each year and contribute over 54  million
Disability Adjusted Life Years, a total equivalent to 3.7% of the global burden of disease
(WHO, 2002). This places diarrhoeal disease due to unsafe water, sanitation and hygiene as
the 6th highest burden of disease on a global scale, a health burden that is largely preventable
(WHO , 2002). Other diseases are related to poor water, sanitation and hygiene such as
trachoma, schistosomiasis, ascariasis, trichuriasis, hookworm disease, malaria and Japanese
encephalitis and contribute to an additional burden of disease.
As of 2000 it was estimated that one-sixth of humanity (1.1 billion people) lacked access to
any form of improved water supply within 1 kilometre of their home (WHO and UNICEF,
2000). Lack of access to safe and adequate water supplies contributes to ongoing poverty
both through the economic costs of poor health and in the high proportion of household
expenditure on water supplies in many poor communities, arising from  the need to purchase
water and/or time and energy expended in collection. Access to water services forms a key
component in the UNDP Human Poverty Index for developing countries (UNDP, 1999).
The importance of adequate water quantity for human health has been recognised for many
years and there has been an extensive debate about the relative importance of water quantity,
water quality, sanitation and hygiene in protecting and improving health ( Cairncross, 1990;
Esrey et al. , 1985; Esrey et al. , 1991). Despite this debate, international guidelines or norms
for minimum water quantities that domestic water supplies should provide remain largely
lacking. For instance, whilst the Millennium Declaration Goals include a target to 'halve the
proportion of people who are unable to reach or to afford safe drinking water by 2015'  (UN,
2000) it does not specify in what quantity such water should be supplied. The WHO/UNICEF
Joint Monitoring Programme, which produces the Global Assessment of Water Supply and
Sanitation data, describe reasonable access as being 'the availability of at least 20 litres per
person per day from a source within one kilometre of the users dwelling'  (WHO and
UNICEF, 2000). However, it should be noted that this definition relates to primarily to access
and should not necessarily be taken as evidence that 20  litres per capita per day is a
recommended quantity of water for domestic use.
Norms for quantities of water to be supplied have been proposed for certain specific
conditions. For instance the SPHERE project sets out 15 litres of water used per capita per
day as being a key indicator in meeting minimum standards for disaster relief (SPHERE,
1998). In their guidance manual prepared for the Department for International Development
(UK), WELL (1998) suggested that a minimum criterion for water supply should be 20  litres
per capita per day, whilst noting the importance of reducing distance and encouraging
household connection. A similar figure has been suggested by other researchers (Carter et al. ,
1997). Gleick (1996) suggested that the international community adopt a figure of 50  litres
per capita per day as a basic water requirement for domestic water supply.2Many uses of water occur largely at the household (for instance drinking, eating and hand-
washing); others  may occur away from the home (laundry and in some cases bathing). This
therefore needs to be borne in mind when ensuring that adequate quantities of domestic
supply are available for these purposes and in interpreting and applying minimum values.
Despite common claims of WHO standards relating to water quantity, WHO has not
previously published specific guidance on the quantities of water as targets for the health
protection and promotion. This is in contrast to the concerted effort made, for example, in
relation to establishing international standards and later guidelines for drinking-water quality
(WHO, 1985; 1993), wastewater use (Mara and Cairncross, 1989) and recreational water
quality(WHO, in finalisation ).
It is important to distinguish quantities of water required for domestic purposes (which
primarily influence health and productivity), and quantities of water required for other
purposes (such as agriculture, industry, commerce, transport, energy and recreation). Overall,
the requirements for domestic supply typically constitute a very minor component of total
water withdrawals ( Gleick, 1993; 1996).
The purpose of this paper is to review the evidence of the relationships between water
quantity, access and health and to provide a basis for the establishment of minimum quantity
and/or access targets for domestic water supplies. It does not address the requirement of
waters for specific groups (e.g. athletes), specific settings (e.g. hydration needs during air
travel or particular occupational settings) or health impacts related to hydration derived from
alcohol consumption.
The paper draws on an extensive literature review based primarily on the published literature,
but in some cases also drawing on ‘grey’ literature where the data was believed to be of good
quality and where this provided clearer information. Key word searches in Cambridge
Scientific Abstracts (including Aqualine, Water Resource Abstracts and Bacteriology
Abstracts) and Medline were employed. In addition, a review was undertaken of available
materials (papers, books, theses, conference proceedings) at WEDC and WHO resource
centres. A representative literature was captured through this process, although as noted
within the text in some areas available literature and evidence is sparse.
2 Defining domestic water supply
In its Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality, WHO defines domestic water as being ' water
used for all usual domestic purposes including consumption, bathing and food preparation'
(WHO, 1993; 2002). This implies that the requirements with regard to the adequacy of water
apply across all these uses and not solely in relation to consumption of water. The Guidelines
exclude some specific uses (for instance dialysis and contact lens cleaning) and elevated
requirements for some particularly sensitive sub-populations (for instance the severely
immuno-compromised). Although this broad definition provides an overall framework for
domestic water usage in the context of quality requirements, it is less useful when
considering quantities required for domestic supply.
Sub-dividing uses of domestic water is useful in understanding minimum quantities of
domestic water required and to inform management options. In the 'Drawers of Water' study
on water use patterns in East Africa, White et al.  (1972) suggested that three types of use
could be defined in relation to normal domestic supply:3• Consumption (drinking and cooking)
• Hygiene (including basic needs for personal and domestic cleanliness)
• Amenity use (for instance car washing, lawn watering).
In updating the Drawers of Water study, Thompson et al.  (2001) suggest a fourth category
can be included of 'productive use' which was of particular relevance to poor households in
developing countries. Productive use of water includes uses such as brewing, animal
watering, construction and small-scale horticulture.
The first two categories identified by White et al.  (1972): ‘consumption’ and ‘hygiene’, have
direct consequences for health both in relation to physiological needs and in the control of
diverse infectious and non-infectious water-related disease. The third category: ‘amenity’
may not directly affect health in many circumstances. Productive water may be critical
among the urban poor in sustaining livelihoods and avoiding poverty and therefore has
considerable indirect influence on human health ( Fass, 1993; Thompson et al. , 2001).
The different primary uses of water are discussed in the following sections and the quantity
requirement of each and its implication for health are reviewed.
3 Consumption
Water is a basic nutrient of the human body and is critical to human life. It supports the
digestion of food, adsorption, transportation and use of nutrients and the elimination of toxins
and wastes from the body ( Kleiner, 1999). Water is also essential for the preparation of
foodstuffs and requirements for food preparation are included in the discussion of
consumption requirements.
3.1 Basic hydration requirements
The human body requires a minimum intake of water in order to be able to sustain life before
mild and then severe dehydration occurs. Adverse health effects have been noted from both
mild and severe dehydration and the latter can be fatal.
The US National Institutes of Health (2002) provide a definition of mild dehydration as being
a loss of 3-5% of body weight, moderate dehydration as being 6-10% loss of body weight and
severe dehydration (classed as a medical emergency) 9-15% loss of body weight. In a recent
review Kleiner (1999) defined mild dehydration as being the equivalent of 1-2% loss of body
weight through fluid losses and over 2% loss as severe dehydration, whilst noting that there is
no universally applied index of hydration status. Mild dehydration can be reversed by
increased fluid intake and  this may be enhanced through the use of salt replacement solutions.
Severe dehydration will require rehydration strategies involving more than simple fluid
replacement, and often food or other osmolar intake is needed;  the process may take up to
24 hours ( Kleiner, 1999).
Dehydration may be a short-term effect, for instance resulting from loss of body fluids in
severe diarrhoea, which can be fatal. Short-term dehydration may also result from excess
alcohol intake or increased water loss due to increased temperature and altitude or decreased
relative humidity combined with inadequate fluid replacement. Dehydration may also be
long-term (often mild) which may result in adverse health effects (Chan et al. , 2002; Kleiner,41999). Long-term dehydration may result from inadequate fluid replacement, often as a
consequence of depressed thirst mechanisms and perceptions of poor beverage taste.
Mild dehydration has been associated with a number of adverse health effects, including
increased risks in susceptible groups to urinary stone formation, increased risks of urinary
tract cancer and poor oral health. Urinary stone formation is significantly increased when the
urine volume excreted is below 1  litre per day; urinary volumes exceeding 2 to 2.5 litres per
day can prevent recurrence of stones in previously affected patients ( Kleiner, 1999). White et
al (1972) suggest that in order to reduce the risk of kidney stones, a minimum of 1.5  litres
should be passed as urine each day.
A recent study in the Adventist community in California noted a strong negative association
with intake of water and the risk of fatal coronary heart disease for both men and women
(Chan et al. , 2002). Relative risks for men reduced to 0.46 for high volume water intake (5 or
more glasses) and 0.54 for women who had medium intake (3-4 glasses) compared to low
water intake (2 or less glasses). If it is assumed that each glass contained 0.25 litres (a
reasonable estimate of size of glass) an estimate of  a minimum of 1.25 litres per capita per
day for men and 0.75 litres per capita per day for women is required to reduce risks of fatal
coronary heart disease. Taking an average of these figures provides 1.0 litre per capita per
day for a population-based estimate of the volume of water that reduces the risk of fatal
coronary disease. Some studies have also indicated decreased risks of colonic and breast
cancer with increasing fluid intake ( Kleiner, 1999).
Kleiner (1999) notes that in general there is less available information regarding adverse
effects on cognitive performance by dehydration, but highlights three studies suggesting that
this would occur. A further review of literature indicated limited available studies in this area
and somewhat contradictory evidence. In a study using volunteers, Neave et al. , (2001) found
no significant main effects of hydration status on cognitive performance, whilst noting
greater mood alertness after successive drinks. By contrast, Rogers et al. (2001) suggested
that there was an immediate (although not sustained) improvement in cognitive performance
on ingestion of water. This suggests that this area requires further investigation.
It is pertinent to note that the majority of health effects derived from dehydration are derived
primarily from developed countries and there is very little available data from developing
countries. However, although these impacts may represent an overall lower proportion of the
burden is disease in developing countries, the effects from dehydration would not be expected
to be different in developing counties.
3.2 Published Reference Values
In their review, White et al.  (1972) suggested that 2.6 litres of water per day is lost through
respiratory loss, insensible perspiration, urination and defecation. In addition, a significant
quantity of water is lost through sensible perspiration if hard work is performed. These
figures led them to suggest that a daily minimum of water required in tropical climates would
be around 3 litres per person, although the volume of water loss suggests that this should be
at the upper end of this scale. They note, however, that under extreme conditions of hard
work at high temperatures in the sun this figure could rise to as much as 25 litres per day.
However, they also point out that the proportion of the fluid intake achieved via food would
be expected to vary significantly and could provide 100% of the fluid requirement in some
rare cases, notably pastoralists where milk was the primary food.5Kleiner (1999) suggests that, based on US National Research Council guidelines in relation to
hydration needs resulting from average energy expenditure and environmental exposure in
the USA, the average male should consume a minimum 2.9 litres per day and the average
female 2.2 litres. Approximately one-third of this fluid was considered likely to be derived
from food.
In the WHO Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality, Guideline Values for chemical
contaminants are based on the assumption of a 60 kg adult consuming 2 litres per day from
drinking water, which would be equivalent to 3 litres per capita per day including food
consumption (if the ratio cited by Kleiner were applied). Where specific guidance is needed
for vulnerable populations, a figure of 1 litre per day for a 10kg child or 0.75 litre per day for
a 5kg child are used (WHO, 1993; p31). The WHO-UNEP-ILO International Programme on
Chemical Safety use reference values for volume of fluid intake in deriving its guidance,
using reference body weights of 70kg for adult males, 58kg for adult females and an average
of 64kg. The reference fluid intake values for these different reference body weights under
different climatic and activity conditions are shown in table 1 below.
Table 1: Daily fluid intake reference values in litres per capita (IPCS, 1994)
Normal conditions High average temp.
32oCModerate activity
Adults 1.0-2.4, average 1.9
(including milk); 1.4
(excluding milk)2.8-3.4 3.7
Adult male 2 - -
Adult female 1.4 - -
Child (10 years) 1.0 - -
3.3 Specific population groups
Particular population groups have particular hydration requirements, including young
children, pregnant or lactating women, the elderly, the terminally ill and athletes. Athletes are
not discussed in this review as hydration would typically also include salt replacement and
both the cause of dehydration and management of rehydration are more specialised than may
legitimately be expected from a normal domestic supply.
As rehydration primarily relates to the replacement of lost fluid from natural processes, it is
important to consider the losses of fluid from different age groups when considering
vulnerable sub-populations. The losses of water from the bodies of small children are
proportionally considerably greater than for adults, 15% of fluid per day as opposed to 4%.
These proportionately higher losses explain why a 7  kg child requires 1 litre per day fluid to
replace lost fluid compared to 2.9  litres for a 70kg adult male, the increase in replacement
fluid being a factor of three compared to a 10-fold difference in weight ( Kleiner, 1999). Low-
birth-weight infants need proportionally even greater fluid replacement per kilogram of
weight than do other infants (Roy and Sinclair, 1975). The figures for fluid replacement
exceed those for fluid intake noted above because this includes all forms of fluid used in
hydration, approximately 30% of which will be derived from food rather than consumption of
liquid.
Pregnant women also require additional fluid replacement to ensure that foetal needs are met,
as well as providing for expanding extra-cellular space and amniotic fluid. The US National6Research Council suggests an allowance of an extra 30ml per day during pregnancy (Food
and Nutrition Board, 1989). Lactating women have additional water requirements, leading to
an additional requirement of 750ml to 1 litre per day for the first six months of lactation
(Food and Nutrition Board, 1989). In those groups with least access to water supply, women
who are pregnant or lactating frequently continue to undertake at least moderate activity in
high temperatures, therefore these needs are additive to the basic needs of all adults.
The elderly may not require additional volumes of water, but may be at greater risk from
dehydration due to decreasing thirst sensations (Phillips et al. , 1984). Furthermore, studies
have noted a relationship between age and the ability of the body to concentrate urine,
suggesting an increasing water requirement to maintain good renal functioning (Rowe et al. ,
1976).
For the terminally ill, Jackonen (1997) highlights a range of benefits and burdens related to
dehydration, with benefits accrued from lower levels of distress and lower awareness of pain
and reduced requirements for urination with the pain and discomfort that this may cause.
Benefits of hydration include preventing dehydration and malnourishment as well as
prolonging life and avoiding health problems such as renal failure. The benefits and burdens
associated with dehydration amongst the terminally ill often relate to medical hydration
(intravenous, nasogastric or nutrition administration) and therefore will have little impact on
volumes of water required in a general domestic supply.
3.4 Requirements to maintain hydration
The evidence outlined above indicates that there are health concerns regarding hydration
status and therefore the requirements for human to maintain an adequate hydration level and
minimise risk of disease associated with adverse effects outlined above must be defined. The
definition of the ‘absolute minimum’ quantity of water to sustain hydration remains elusive,
as this is dependent on climate, activity level and diet.
In developing countries, White et al.  (1972) and Gleick (1996) suggest that a minimum of 3
litres per capita per day is required for adults in most situations. However, households with
least access to water supplies are more likely to be engaged in at least moderate activity and
often in above-average temperatures. Data from the US Army reported in White et al.  (1972)
provides estimates of water quantity needs at different temperatures and activity levels. This
indicates that at 25oC with moderate activity in the sun (for instance agricultural work)
approximately 4.5 litres are required to maintain hydration. This rises to about 6 litres at 30oC
or when hard work in the sun is undertaken at 25oC. Although the US Army has more recent
recommendations for hourly intake of water per hour in relation to heat categories and
activity intensity to prevent heat injury, this do not easily translate into non-military activity.
They do, however, stipulate that hourly fluid intake should not exceed 1.08 quarts (1.03
litres) and that daily intake should not exceed 12 quarts (11.35 litres) (United States Army
Center for Health Promotion and Preventive Medicine, 2003).
The literature reviewed in section 3.2 to 3.4, indicates that the quantity of water required for
hydration (whether via direct ingestion or food) should be a minimum of 2 litres for average
adults in average conditions, rising to 4.5 litres per day under conditions typically facing the
most vulnerable in tropical climates (see table 2 below) and higher in conditions of raised
temperature and/or excessive physical activity. This figure can be interpreted as applying to
all adults and to children, given the difficulty in determining whether the ration of adult/child
water requirements would remain the same with increasing activity and/or temperature. These7values encompass the range in which beneficial impacts on prevention of coronary disease
and kidney stone occurrence appears likely and would be at the lower end of requirements to
prevent recurrence of kidney stones.
By also taking into consideration the needs of lactating women, many of whom in the group
with least access will still be expected to undertake moderate activity in high ambient
temperatures, a minimum quantity required of fluid required for hydration (via both direct
consumption and food) can be estimated as 5.5 litres per capita per day. This will not account
for those in unusually hot environments or engaged in strenuous physical activity where
minimum needs may be considerably greater.
As some hydration needs are met through fluid obtained from food, the figure of 5.5 could be
interpreted in two ways. Firstly, it could be assumed that the water supply should be able to
meet all hydration needs (i.e. minus contributions from food). The second approach would be
to assume that one-third of all hydration fluid is derived from food and that therefore
domestic water supply need only meet two-thirds of the minimum quantity identified.
In this report we use the former approach because as the proportion of fluid obtained from
food may vary significantly in response to diet and culture from negligible to all hydration
needs as noted by White et al.  (1972). Therefore, trying to allocate a proportion of the fluid
requirement to food on a global basis would risk significantly under-estimating water
quantity needs in a number of situations where food contribution is negligible. As these are
likely to be found in situations with vulnerable populations, notably in emergencies, this
would entail a serious risk. Allocating the full hydration component to drinking water may
over-estimate the quantity of water required, but this is believed to be no more significant that
the variation likely to occur due to activity levels and temperature.
Table 2: Volumes of water required for hydration
Volumes (litres/day)
Average
conditionsManual labour in
high temperaturesTotal needs in
pregnancy/lactation
Female
adults2.2 4.5 4.8 (pregnancy)
5.5 (lactation)
Male adults 2.9 4.5 -
Children l.0 4.5 -
3.5 Hydration needs: types of fluid intake required
The benefits derived from specific types of fluid consumed are a matter of some debate. For
instance, Kleiner (1999) suggests that drinking diuretics such as coffee may lead to mild
dehydration, although a preliminary study by Grandjean et al.  (1999) suggests that there is no
significant difference between use of different beverages on hydration status, whilst
indicating that further research is required.
Chan et al.  (2002) demonstrated a statistically significant positive association between
consumption of fluids other than water and increased risk of coronary disease among women
consuming over 5 glasses per day compared to those consuming less than 2  glasses per day.
The relative risk was 2.47, although the confidence interval were wide. However, the point
estimates of relative risk did not change even when adjusting for more traditional factors for8coronary disease. A positive association was also noted in men, although this was not
statistically significant. An attempt was made to identify the impact of specific fluids, but this
was not possible for juices and sugared drinks because of generally low daily intake, the
consumption of caffeinated beverages was positive but not statistically significant and the
intake for soy milk was close to null. The authors note that the population studied consumed
less alcohol and caffeine than the USA average which may limit the ability to project the
findings more broadly. Although the analysis from this study does not support risk
assessments of specific fluids, the study does highlight the specific value of water as opposed
to more generic fluid intake.
3.6 Quality of water for consumption
The quality of water that is consumed is well-recognised as an important transmission route
for infectious diarrhoeal and other diseases (WHO, 1993). The importance of water quality
continues to be emphasised by its role in epidemics and contribution to endemic disease from
pathogens (Ford, 1999; Payment and Hunter, 2001). This affects both developed and
developing countries, although the majority of the health burden is carried by children in
developing countries ( Prüss et al. , 2002; WHO, 2000). However, recent outbreaks such as
that of cryptosporidiosis in Milwaukee and E.coli O157:H7 and Campylobacter jejuni  in
Walkerton, Ontario illustrate that the developed world also remains at risk (Mackenzie et al. ,
1994; O’Connor, 2002).
Disease may also result from consumption of water containing toxic levels of chemicals. The
health burden is most significant for two  chemicals: arsenic and fluoride. Arsenic
contamination of drinking water sources is being found in increasing numbers of water
supplies world-wide and in Asia in particular. The total disease burden is as yet unknown, but
in Bangladesh, the country with the most widely reported problem, between 35 and
77 million people are at potential risk (Smith et al. , 2000). Fluoride is also a significant
global problem and WHO (1999) suggest that over 60 million people are affected by fluorosis
in India and China and suggest the total global population affected as being 70  million.
Nitrate is also of concern although there remains uncertainty about the scale of adverse health
effects from nitrate as few countries include methemaglobinaemia as a notifiable disease
(Saywell, 1999). Raised nitrate is, however, identified as a potential public health problems in
countries where concentrations in groundwater reach extremely high values ( Melian et al. ,
1997).
Water provided for direct consumption and ingestion via food should be of a quality that does
not represent a significant risk to human health. A 'zero-risk' scenario for public supplies is
not achievable and  evidence points to the need to define tolerable risks, commonly based on
estimates of numbers of excess cases per defined population size. This approach underpins
much risk assessment thinking within the water sector for both microbial and chemical
contaminants ( Fewtrell and Bartram, 2001; Haas et al. , 1999; WHO, 1996).
3.7 Quantities of water required for cooking
Water is essential as a medium for preparing food. One study noted that the volume of
cooking water available may be an important determinant for diarrhoea incidence in children
over 3 years of age, although this was less important than water quality for the under 3  years
age group (Herbert, 1985).9Defining the requirements for water for cooking is difficult, as this depends on the diet and
the role of water in food preparation. However, most cultures have a staple foodstuff, which
is usually some form of carbohydrate-rich vegetable or cereal. A minimum requirement for
water supplies would therefore also include sufficient water to be able to prepare an adequate
quantity of the staple food for the average family to provide nutritional benefit.
It is difficult to be precise about volumes required to prepare staples as this depends on the
staple itself. However, an example can be provided for rice, which probably represents the
most widely used staple food worldwide. Recommendations for nutrition usually deal with
the intake of nutrients rather than specific food stuffs. Most food pyramids give a suggest an
intake for cereals of 6 to 11  servings per day, or 600 – 1100  grams per day ( Graeme
Clugston, personal communication). To prepare rice using the adsorption method (i.e. only
sufficient water to cook the rice is added), 1.6 litres is required for 600g per capita per day.
More water may be required to ensure that other foodstuffs can be cooked, although defining
minimum quantities is difficult as this depends on the nature of the food being prepared. For
instance, Gleick (1996) suggests that on average 10 litres per capita per day is required for
food preparation, whilst Thompson et al. (2001) show that in East Africa only 4.2  litres per
capita per day were used for both drinking and cooking for households with a piped
connection and even less (3.8 litres per capita per day) for households without a connection.
Taking into account drinking needs, this suggests that between 1.5 and 2 litres per capita per
day is used for cooking.
If the quantity of water required for cooking rice is taken as representing the needs for staple
preparation and assuming further water is required for preparation of other food, the evidence
suggests that in most cases approximately 2 litres per capita per day should be available from
domestic supplies to support food preparation.
By adding the volume required for food preparation to the volumes identified in table 2, a
figure for total consumption  (i.e. drinking water plus water for foodstuffs preparation) of
7.5 litres per capita per day can be calcu lated as the basic minimum of water required, taking
into account the needs of lactating women.
4  Water quantity requirements for hygiene
The need for domestic water supplies for basic health protection exceeds the minimum
required for consumption (drinking and cooking). Additional volumes are required for
maintaining food and personal hygiene through hand and food washing, bathing and laundry.
Poor hygiene may in part be caused by a lack of sufficient quantity of domestic water supply
(Cairncross and Feachem, 1993). The diseases linked to poor hygiene include diarrhoeal and
other diseases transmitted through the faecal-oral route; skin and eye diseases, in particular
trachoma and diseases related to infestations, for instance louse and tick-borne typhus
(Bradley, 1977; Cairncross and Feachem, 1993).
The relative influence of consumption of contaminated water, poor hygiene and lack of
sanitation on diarrhoeal disease in particular has been the topic of significant discussion (see
for example Esrey et al. , 1985). This has mirrored a broader debate within the health sector
worldwide regarding the need for quantifiable evidence in reducing health burdens. The
desire for evidence-based health interventions is driven by the need to maximise benefits
from limited resources (a critical factor both for governments and their populations). It is also10driven by the desire to ensure that populations benefit from  the interventions that deliver the
greatest improvement in their health.
4.1 The links between water supply, hygiene and disease
Classifying diseases by causative agent such as microbe type for infectious disease has a
value in terms of understanding aetiology of infection. However, a more effective way to
inform decision-making is to categorise pathogens /diseases in relation to the broad mode of
transmission. Bradley (1977) suggests that there are four principal categories that relate to
water and which are not mutually exclusive:
• water-borne - caused through consumption of contaminated water (for instance diarrhoeal
diseases, infectious hepatitis, typhoid, guinea worm);
• water-washed - caused through the use of inadequate volumes for personal hygiene (for
instance diarrhoeal disease, infectious hepatitis, typhoid, trachoma, skin and eye
infections);
• water-based - where an intermediate aquatic host is required (for instance guinea worm,
schistosomiasis); and,
• water-related vector - spread through insect vectors associated with water (for instance
malaria, dengue fever).
Other workers have suggested a change in this classification system to replace the waterborne
category with faecal-oral (to reflect multiple routes of transmission) and to restrict the water-
washed diseases to only as those skin and eye infections that solely relate to the quantity of
water used for hygiene ( Cairncross and Feachem, 1993). The original Bradley (1977) system
has particular value as its focus is on the potential impact of different interventions. The
occurrence of particular diseases in more than one group is a legitimate outcome where
distinct interventions may contribute to control. Thus guinea worm for example is classified
as both a water-based disease and water-borne disease.
4.2  Relationships between water, sanitation hygiene and diarrhoea
Diseases primarily transmitted through the faecal-oral route (shown in figure 1 below)
include infectious diarrhoea, typhoid, cholera and infectious hepatitis. Faecal-oral diseases
are associated with acute symptoms (with a probability of death) and in some cases with
delayed sequelae. Transmission may occur through a variety of mechanisms, including
consumption of contaminated water and food as well as through person-person contact
(Bradley, 1977). These are dealt with together here, in order to emphasise the importance of
local disease patterns rather than applying generic models. The available evidence from
health studies suggests that interventions are likely to be locality-specific and are determined
by timing and the interaction between different factors. As noted by Vanderslice and Briscoe
(1995) as all the interventions deliver some improvement, the relative impacts of each may
have limited relevance for policy.
Other factors apart from water and sanitation facilities and hygiene behaviours may
significantly influence diarrhoeal disease. For example breast-feeding has been noted in
several studies as being protective against diarrhoeal disease independently of other
interventions (Al-Ali et al. , 1997; Vanderslice and Briscoe, 1995).11Figure 1.1: Faecal-oral route transmission of disease (taken from WELL, 1998)
Whilst numerous studies have been undertaken to investigate the relative importance of
different interventions, relatively few have been sufficiently rigorous to allow quantified
reductions in disease to be estimated. In a review based on 67 studies, Esrey et al.  (1985)
investigated the relationships between diarrhoeal disease and a number of factors including
water quality, water availability and excreta disposal. The findings from this review are
summarised below in table 3 and suggest that median reductions in diarrhoeal disease from
water availability were higher than those recorded for water quality improvements. Combined
improvements in quality and availability led to greater median reductions in disease
incidence. The variation in reduction from each intervention type was significant, with the
highest recorded reductions ranging from 48% to 100%. For all interventions, studies were
reported that led to no measurable reduction in diarrhoeal disease.
12Table 3: Percentage reductions in diarrhoeal disease rates attributed to water or excreta
disposal improvements ( Esrey et al., 1985)
Percentage reduction
Type of intervention Number of studies Median Range
All interventions 63 22 0-100
Improvements in water quality 9 16 0-90
Improvements in water availability 17 25 0-100
Improvements in water quality &
availability8 37 0-82
Improvements in excreta disposal 10 22 0-48
In a subsequent review of 144 studies looking at various different single and multiple
interventions in water and sanitation by Esrey et al.  (1991), relatively few (56) were deemed
to be rigorous and only 24 could be used to calculate morbidity reductions. The findings from
this study are shown in table 4. The data from the rigorous studies suggested that median
reductions in morbidity were relatively low from all water improvements, unless these were
combined with sanitation improvement.  In this review, the impact of combined
improvements in water quality and quantity resulted in a lower reductions than for water
quantity interventions alone, which is counter-intuitive and contradicts the findings of the
previous review. The authors of this study also noted that the benefits derived from increased
water availability were not necessarily felt in all age groups, a finding highlighted in a
previous study by Herbert (1985).
Table 4:  Reduction in diarrhoeal disease morbidity in one or more components of
water and sanitation ( Esrey et al. , 1991)
All studies Rigorous studies
Factor N Median %
reductionN Median %
reduction
Water and sanitation 7 20 2 30
Sanitation 11 22 5 36
Water quality and
quantity22 16 2 17
Water quality 7 17 4 15
Water quantity 7 27 5 20
Hygiene 6 33 6 33
These findings are most readily understood as demonstrating the significant impact of all
interventions and that the scale and relative impact of a single intervention depends strongly
on the dominant route of exposure under local circumstances. Prüss and Havelaar (2001) note
that for many infectious diarrhoeal diseases, exposure-risk relationships are poorly
understood and therefore there are profound difficulties in attributing outcomes to specific
exposures. Sazawal et al. (1991) demonstrated that children with persistent diarrhoea have an
overall higher number of episodes of diarrhoeal disease, compared to those suffering from
acute diarrhoea. Persistent diarrhoea will affect immune competency and increase subsequent
susceptibility. Therefore, in understanding local disease patterns, identifying whether a
significant proportion of children suffer from persistent diarrhoea may be important in
understanding exposure routes.13A variety of findings have been reported in other studies from developing countries looking
at diarrhoeal disease incidence. Esrey (1996) concluded on the basis of a review of data from
Demographic Health Surveys from 11 countries that improvements in sanitation led to more
significant reductions in diarrhoeal disease than improvements in water supply. In the
Philippines, increasing risks of hospitalisation due to severe diarrhoea was noted with
declining hygiene standards, but only indices of overall cleanliness (a composite measure of
environmental hygiene and personal appearance) and kitchen hygiene were significantly
associated with diarrhoea ( Baltazar et al. , 1993). Bukenya and Nwokolo (1991) showed that
the presence of a standpipe at households in urban Papua New Guinea was associated with
less diarrhoea than users of communal sources and that this was found across all socio-
economic groups, whilst noting the importance of removal of both human and pig faeces.
Gorter et al.  (1991) showed that in Nicaragua, that children living in households with a water
supply within 500m had 34% less diarrhoea than children living in households whose water
source was over 500m from the house. Gorter et al.  (1991) note there once a water supply is
within 500m, reducing distance had no further impact.
Other studies have assessed the impact of different water supply and sanitation interventions
using different outcome measures. A study in India that used nutritional status as a health
measure suggested that water quality was the principal determinant for health in children
under the age of 3, whereas water quantity was most important for children above 3 (Herbert,
1985). A previous study in rural Lesotho, height for weight scores were found to be better
associated with latrine use than water quantity, water quality not being analysed as it had
previously been found to be insignificant ( Esrey et al. , 1992). However, in South India,
defecation practice was not a significant predictor of height for weight scores (Herbert,
1985).
A recent study in Pakistan demonstrated that increased quantities of water available at
households was critical in preventing stunting (van der Hoek et al. , 2002). This study showed
that the presence of storage containers linked to household connections was the most
protective level of service and that limited benefits were accrued when water was only
available via a yard tap compared to collection from a communal source.
The evidence from the literature suggests that water availability has an important influence of
health and diarrhoea incidence in particular, although as noted by both Esrey et al.  (1991) and
Herbert (1985) this is not necessarily true for all age groups. Esrey (1996) suggests that it is
only when the water supply is delivered on-plot that health gains are found. It is also noted
that this may be due to a number of factors, not least of which is the better socio-economic
status of households with this level of service and possibly better quality of water supplied
(Esrey, 1996). There appears to be limited published literature on the impact of providing
non-piped water supplies on-plot, which would be of particular importance in determining the
fraction of diarrhoeal disease that is directly attributable to increased service level and the
fraction attributable to other factors. In the study reported by Gorter et al.  (1991), although
not explicitly stated, there is an implication that all water sources when within 500m offered
health benefits as no difference was noted in diarrhoeal disease incidence between water
sources.
The impact of water availability may have particular benefits for child health. Prost and
Négrel (1989) suggest that the quantity of water used for children’s hygiene is sensitive to
availability and that reducing the time taken to collect water (including journey and waiting
time) from 5 hours to 15 minutes, results in 30 times more water being used for child14hygiene. It is suggested that reducing the time take to collect water will also allow greater
time to be available for child feeding, food preparation or more frequent feeding as well as
better hygiene. Other commentaries suggest that reductions in diarrhoeal disease with
increased service level may in fact be much more modest ( Vanderslice and Briscoe, 1995).
Despite the evidence pointing to the benefits of increased quantities of water on health, the
relationship is not simple and most research has made significant assumptions about water
use. Hygiene is not solely related to availability of water, but also to specific hygiene
behaviours such as hand washing at critical times, for instance before eating and cooking and
after defecation ( Cairncross, 1993; Petersen et al. , 1998; Shahid et al., 1996; Sircar et al. ,
1987; Stanton and Clemens, 1987). Factors other than handwashing hygiene may influence
the contamination of hands, of which humidity and temperature are reported to be important
(Pinfold, 1990).
In relation to hygiene practices, a review by Huttly et al.  (1997) suggested that targeting
programmes on a single behaviour was more effective than addressing several behaviours
when promoting hygiene. They suggest that a median reduction of 35% in diarrhoeal disease
morbidity from improved hand-washing is achievable through well-designed hygiene
education programmes, with a range of 30-89%. Recent work appears to indicate that the
median reduction may in fact be higher, although the results remain to be published (Val
Curtis, personal communication). It should be noted that the figures quoted by Huttly et al.
(1997) are of a similar order of magnitude to estimates of disease reduction using household
treatment of water ( Sobsey, 2002). This indicates that household-targeted interventions
deliver significant improvements in health even when environmental conditions and services
are not conducive to improved health, although as with all environmental interventions the
range of impacts is considerable. In the case of household water treatment, this appears to be
from zero reduction in diarrhoea incidence to about 20% reduction.
The timing of hand washing maybe  important. Experience suggests that the most critical
times are following defecation and before eating. Curtis et al.  (2000) suggest that the critical
time is post-defecation rather than before eating, while other studies suggest that the reverse
is true in some situations (Birmingham et al., 1997). Stanton and Clemens (1987) found
reduction in diarrhoea incidence among young children was influenced by maternal hand
washing prior to food preparation.
A number of studies suggest that hand washing with soap is the critical component of this
behaviour and that hand washing only with water provides little or no benefit ( Cairncross,
1993; Ghosh et al. , 1997; Khan, 1982; Oo et al. , 2000). Hoque and Briend (1991) showed
that whilst less effective than when using a rubbing agent, such as soap, mud or ash, some
reductions in contamination were found when washing with water alone, but that use of
alternative rubbing agents (mud or ash) provided the same benefits as soap. Hoque et al.
(1995) also found that use of mud, ash and soap all achieved the same level of cleanliness
with hand washing. and suggest that it is the action of rubbing of hands that was more
important than the agent used. These authors suggest that rinsing with 2  litres of clean water
was also protective, although this seems to be a large quantity, which would difficult to
sustain in the absence of on-plot access to water.
In a study in Peru, Gilman et al.  (1993) found a positive relationship between the quantity of
water available in the home and the frequency of hand washing in a shantytown. The exact
nature of the water supply is unclear, but appears to have been concrete tanks at households15that were periodically filled, either from tanker trucks or piped water. The authors of this
study concluded that hygiene education was of limited value unless water supplies were
improved.
4.3 Relationships between water, hygiene and other infectious diseases
Infectious diseases of the skin (a sub-set of water-washed diseases) and trachoma are
amongst the diseases on which water quantity would be expected to exert significant
influence.  Trachoma is the most extensively studied disease, given its relatively high impact
on health.
In a review of available evidence, Prüss and Mariotti (2000) found that only two studies out
the 19 reviewed showed a significant relationship with water quantity and suggested that the
relationship between trachoma incidence and quantity of water was not simple. One study in
southern Morocco that showed a difference in incidence in trachoma between the use of less
5 litres per day and use of more than 10  litres per day. Anot her study was noted as indicating
no relationship to quantity of water used, but which showed a strong relationship between
availability of water and trachoma. In another study from Latin America, the protective effect
of water quantity was seen only at high levels, as the difference in incidence was related to
use of more or less than 5000  litres per capita per month (165 litres per capita per day), (Luna
et al. , 1992). Such volumes of water are indicative of water piped into the home. Prüss and
Mariotti (2000) also note six studies that showed a positive relationship between increased
access to water and reduced incidence of trachoma, with a median reduction of 27%, with a
range of 11-83% reduction.
In most studies, distance from primary water source to home appears to be the most
significant water supply factor influencing trachoma. In a review by Esrey et al.  (1991), four
studies were found that demonstrated a median reduction of 30% in trachoma incidence with
shorter distances to the home and two studies that showed no relationship. In all cases, the
differences in distance associated with significant differences in incidence were again
relatively gross and included:
• household connection versus source more than 500m from household;
• water source less than 5 minutes compared to over one hour; and,
• water source less than 30 minutes compared to source over 2 hours away.
Only in one study was there a more sensitive measure, the difference being between sources
more than or less than 200m distant. All these studies were included within the review by
Prüss and Mariotti (2000) and were in the group of six studies showing a reduction in
trachoma incidence with increased access.
The reviews by Esrey et al.  (1991) and Prüss and  Mariotti (2000) provide evidence to
indicate that only relatively gross differences in water quantity, as indexed by access by
service level, are significant in relation to the incidence of trachoma. The importance of
distance is supported by several other studies and reviews on trachoma prevalence (Hsieh et
al., 2000; Prost and Négrel, 1989; West et al. , 1989). West et al.  (1991) concluded that per
capita water availability was not associated either with trachoma or facial cleanliness. Bailey
et al. . (1991) showed that the reduced volumes of water used for washing children’s faces
were associated with trachoma, but total per capita volume use was not. Several workers have
suggested that it is value placed on the use of water for hygiene rather than source proximity16and per capita water collection, which is protective against trachoma (Bailey et al. ,
1991;West et al. , 1989;  Zerihun, 1997).
Most studies of the incidence of trachoma suggest that it is hygiene behaviour that is the
primary determinant. For instance, facial cleanliness is noted as being important and appears
to function independently of water quantity (West and  al., 1989). Furthermore, clustering of
cases within communities is noted as important, as is the presence of siblings with trachoma
within individual households (West et al. , 1991; 1996). Research suggests that factors such as
cattle ownership are also important in rural areas and that sanitation and garbage disposal are
important in both urban and rural areas (Hsieh et al. , 2000; West et al. , 1996; Zerihun, 1997).
This is supported by a review of the evidence to support environmental and facial cleanliness
interventions in integrated trachoma programmes (Emerson et al. , 2000).
Infectious skin diseases have been less well researched. In a review of influences on skin
disease in rural Tanzania, Gibbs (1996) found that household density and low socio-
economic conditions were important determinants for incidence of transmissible skin disease.
The study compared two villages and found that distance to water source was not
significantly associated with skin disease, despite one village having a water source within 20
minutes and the other having a water source that was 46 minutes from the village. Using
figure 2, this would suggest a significant difference in quantities of water collected.
Evidence from Nepal suggests that the influence of water on hygiene may also reflect the
availability of heated  water rather than all water in cold climates. A review of water supply
access data and diarrhoeal and skin diseases showed that in Districts which have typically
very cold seasons for part of the year, hygiene-related diseases remain much higher than
average (Howard and Pond, 2002). It is suggested that despite increasing access to water
supply and sanitation, the absence of hot water inhibits good hygiene, a finding in line with
research into emergency responses in countries with distinct cold seasons ( Buttle and Smith,
1999).
4.4 Minimum quantity of water required for effective hygiene
The evidence from the literature consistently points to use of  water  as being important to
controlling disease and the fact that lack of access to water may impede its use and thereby
adversely affect health. The evidence indicates that the benefit from increased quantity of
water would only be felt in relation to the gross differences of service level and that hygiene
behaviour is more important within populations using communal water sources. This suggests
that incremental benefits among households with  a communal source of water from
increased quantities of water used are limited.
Review of the data regarding hygiene practices and disease therefore does not enable the
definition of a minimum quantity of water recommended for use to ensure effective hygiene
is practised. The evidence suggests that while benefits are accrued from increased availability
of water, this is not solely related to quantities of water used, although increased availability
is likely to increase quantities used. The evidence further suggests that it is the effective use
of both water and cleansing agents and the timing of hygiene practices that are more
important than volumes of water used.  Furthermore, as some hygiene behaviour protective of
health, for example laundry and bathing, may be carried out off-plot, the quantity of water
required to sustain good hygiene may vary significantly with water collection behaviour.17For water quantity to act as an absolute constraint on hygiene, it must be available only in
very small quantities. To act as a positive driver for improved hygiene, water must be
available at higher service levels and ideally supplied at least through one tap on the house
plot.  Since (as discussed below), the quantity of water collected may be relatively inflexible
beyond gross differences in supply type/service level defining a minimum quantity of water
is neither supported by evidence nor of  practical value.
4.5 Water quantity/access and non-infectious disease
There are other health benefits of increased access within the range implying physical
collection, notably reduced potential for damage to the spine and for the early onset arthritic
diseases and protection against hip damage ( Dufault, 1988; Page, 1996). Where women must
walk long distances  this may exacerbate malnourishment and also affect the quantity and
quality of milk produced by lactating women ( Dufault, 1988).
4.6 Quantity and accessibility: how much do people use and what are the links?
The importance of water availability has been shown above to influence health in the
preceding discussion (sections 3 and 4) and some of the difficulties in interpreting available
data have  been noted. . As noted in section 4.4, the benefit from increased quantity of water
is only felt in relation to the gross differences of service level. It is therefore useful to review
the evidence of the interaction between accessibility and quantity in order to assess how
health may be influenced by these factors.
Most of the studies cited in the above-mentioned reviews as providing evidence of the greater
importance of quantity actually provided measures of accessibility, with the assumption that
increased accessibility equates to increased volumes of water used ( Esrey et al. , 1991). It is
therefore important to assess to what extent this relationship is true and what changes in
quantity can be expected. This has particular value in ensuring that the formulation of the true
nature of the problem is correct in order to inform effective decision making.
Cairncross (1987) provides an example from Mozambique that demonstrated that water
consumption in a village with a standpipe within 15 minutes was 12.30 litres per capita per
day compared 3.24 litres per capita per day in a village where it took over five hours to
collect a bucket of water. The excess water was primarily used for hygiene-related purposes.
However, the difference in time points to the influence of only gross differences in service
level, in this case between effectively no access and a service level that can be described as
basic access. Reviewing several studies on water use and collection behaviour, Cairncross
(1987) suggests that there is a clearly defined general response of water volumes used by
households to accessibility, shown in figure 2 below.18Figure 2.2: Graph of travel time (in minutes) versus consumption (taken from WELL,
1998)
Once the time taken to collect water source exceeds a few minutes (typically around 5
minutes or 100m from the house), the quantities of water collected decrease significantly.
This graph contains a well-defined ‘plateau’ of consumption that appears to operate within
boundaries defined by distances equivalent to around 100 to 1000m or 5 to 30 minutes
collection time. There is little change in quantity of water collected within these boundaries
(Cairncross and Feachem, 1993). Beyond distance of one kilometre or more than 30 minutes
total collection time, quantities of water will be expected to further decrease, in rural areas to
a bare minimum where only consumption needs can be met. In urban areas, where water
supplies may be close but total collection times are very high, greater volumes may be
collected that will support hygiene, although the overall impact on household poverty is
significant ( Aiga and Umenai, 2002).
Once water is delivered through at least a single tap on-plot, the quantity of water increases
significantly and further increases are found only when water is piped into the home and is
available through multiple taps. The findings from a study from Jinja, Uganda, shown in table
5 below illustrates this point (WELL, 1998). Average consumption of water when it is piped
into the home is relatively high (155 l/c/d), but decreases to 50 l/c/d when water is supplied to
a yard level. When water is outside the home, average consumption drops still further to
roughly one-third the average consumption at a yard tap and one-tenth that of households
with water piped into the home.
19Table 5: Average water consumption figures, Jinja, Uganda (WELL, 1998)
Type of supply Average
consumption (l/c/d)Service level
Traditional sources,
springs or handpumps15.8 Communal
Standpost 15.5 Communal
Yard tap 50 In compound
House connection 155 Within house
(multiple)
The available evidence suggests that the volume of water used in the home is sensitive only
to gross differences in service level. As noted by WELL (1998) therefore the first priority is
to ensure that households reach the plateau (figure 3), that is to have access to an improved
water source within one kilometre, which corresponds to the current definition of reasonable
access used in assessing progress in global coverage with water supply and sanitation (WHO
and UNICEF, 2000). Beyond this, unless water is provided at a household level, no
significant changes in water quantities collected will be noted. Clearly benefits at each stage
are also accrued from ensuring that the water is of a quality consistent with a tolerable risk to
health and from ensuring that the water collected is put to effective use for hygiene.
Although there are limited published studies, there appears to be relatively little variation in
quantities used when the water is supplied through a yard level of service, probably because
this level of service does not permit easy use of water-hungry devices and efforts expended to
obtain water remain sufficiently high to limit overall quantities used. Once water is supplied
through multiple taps within the house, there is more significant variation in volumes used as
more water-hungry and time-saving devices can be deployed and physical effort to obtain
water is largely obviated.
Studies in Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda suggest that the quantities of water used for bathing
(including hand washing) and washing of clothes and dishes is sensitive to service level
(Thompson et al. , 2001). For houses using water sources outside the home, an average of 6.6
litres per capita are used for washing dishes and clothes and 7.3 litres per capita for bathing.
By contrast for houses with a household connection to piped water supply use on average
16.3 litres per capita for washing dishes and clothes and 17.4 litres per capita for bathing. The
authors suggest that for the households using a water source outside the home, the lesser
volume collected has a negative impact on hygiene although this is not quantified.
4.7 Quantity and cost: what influence does this have on use?
There have also been suggestions that where water is purchased, the cost may also be a
limiting factor on the volumes of water used. The literature is, however, more limited than
that dealing with the influence of distance. There are suggestions that in some environments a
graph of similar dimensions and shape as the quantity-distance graph can be developed
(Cairncross and Feachem, 1993; WELL, 1998).
Cairncross and Kinnear (1992) showed that the cost of water purchased from vendors in
Khartoum, Sudan, did not led to a significant reduction in the quantity of water procured.
Cairncross and Kinnear (1992) suggested that in poorer communities, where an increasing20proportion of household income must be spent on acquiring water, the only major item of
expenditure available for sacrifice was the food budget and therefore it was probable that
high costs of water were contributing to under-nutrition.
Thompson et al.  (2001) note that in East Africa average costs of water for households with a
piped water connection in urban areas actually decreased over the preceding 30 years by 20%
(when compared to the study by White et al.  (1972)). Thompson et al. (2001) also note that
average costs of water used by households without a household connection in rural and urban
areas increased by 14% and 28% respectively. At the same time, households with
connections to piped water decreased water consumption by 50%, while urban and rural
households using off-plot water sources actually increased consumption by 60% and 80%
respectively.
The overall impact of changes in cost on volumes of water collected does not seem to have
been significant and may be confounded by other factors. The authors note that the reduction
in use by households with a connection to a piped supply may be as a result of a number of
factors, including increasing intermittence of piped supplies. A further issue not discussed
that may have influenced quantities used is the expansion in the use of meters leading to more
careful consumption by households. For households lacking a household connection, cost
increases may have been off-set by increasing household incomes, allowing greater quantities
of water to be purchased.
In terms of the influence of cost at a household level, Thompson et al.  (2001) indicate that
consumption in households using off-plot water supplies was strongly influenced by
economic factors, with wealth of the household being the most important factor, followed by
the cost per litre of water. This showed a marked change from the first study of water use
behaviour in East Africa where container size and source location were the most important
factors. For households with a connection to the piped water supply, consumption was again
noted as being primarily determined by wealth indicators. In other settings, the increasing use
of metering in piped water supplies may influence consumption and the use of progressive
tariffs can be applied to penalise excessive use, whilst promoting provision of quantities to
meet basic hygiene needs.
In studies on water usage undertaken in three urban areas in Uganda (Howard et al. , 2002)
there was limited evidence of a significant association between cost of water and quantities of
water collected. In one town, Soroti, quantities of water were actually greater from sources
where payment was required, although as these were taps supplied to a compound, this is
likely to have been a function of access (Howard, 2002). The major influence of the need to
purchase water appears to have been to promote multiple source use, thus elasticity was seen
primarily in source selection behaviour rather than reducing volumes or changes in prices.
4.8 Other factors that may affect quantities of water used
Factors such as supply reliability may also influence quantities of water collected, although
again there is very limited published data to establish what relationships exist. Zerah (2000)
indicates that low-income families in New Delhi are likely to be at greatest risk from poor
water supply continuity. As they have more limited resources, they are less able to store large
volumes of water at home and this led to the use of smaller volumes of water and impaired
hygiene, although this is not quantified. It is likely that the nature of the discontinuity will
affect the hardship caused. Whilst regular discontinuity may cause more hardship, this may
be mitigated to some extent if the interruption in supply is predictable as this will allow the21household to develop coping strategies for water collection. The greatest problems may be
felt when discontinuity is frequent, but very unpredictable. Anecdotal evidence from many
African cities indicate that this is common and may lead to collection of water from piped
networks at odd hours, including late at night.
When investigating consumption patterns within a piped water supply with multiple levels of
service, the interaction between the volumes used between different levels of service requires
attention. Volumes of water available for users of lower service levels may be reduced as a
direct consequence of over-consumption by households with higher-service levels. This has
been shown in a study in Ghana, where low-income communities that relied on public taps
received less water and faced greater shortages than high-income communities in part
because of the consumption patterns of the latter (Stephens, 1996).
A further problem with intermittent water supply is that households may be forced to store
water within or close to the home, thus leading to increasing risks from vector-borne diseases
such as dengue fever (Ahmad, 2000; Ault, 1994; Rosenbaum et al. , 1995). Similar problems
will also noted in houses that only have access to a basic level of service, where water storage
is required.
4.9 Laundry: on and off-plot use
Minimum requirements for domestic supply should include  adequate water for laundry and
bathing. In some cases this will be done at the house and in other circumstances some or all
of these activities may be carried out at the water source rather than at the household. In both
cases, it would be expected that if an improved source is used, this should provide adequate
quantities of water to meet these demands.
Where the source is an improved communal source whether laundering occurs at the house or
source may vary on the nature of the settlement, with greater use at the household expected in
urban areas. For instance, a significant proportion of households in urban Uganda appeared to
collect and carry water back to the home for laundering (Howard et al. , 2002). In rural areas,
it may be socially acceptable for people to bathe and launder clothes at or close to the water
source. In some cases, designs for water supplies include facilities for bathing and laundry.
In some communities, users of communal supplies may be reluctant to transport sufficient
water for laundry and may opt for use of alternative sources. In some communities it has been
noted that the use of water from different source types may vary depending on judgements
made as to the acceptability of the source for a given use ( Madanat and Humplick, 1993). The
term ‘rationality factor’ has been used to describe this differential use of water from different
sources in rural areas ( Almedom and Odhiambo, 1994). For instance, in East Africa it was
noted that 30% of the population without household connections to a piped water supply use
unprotected water sources for laundry (Thompson et al. , 2001). This may  increase risks to
health, for instance by increasing exposure to water-based and vector-borne diseases such as
schistosomiasis and potentially other vector-borne diseases.
Where water is scarce or beyond the threshold of 1000m, there may be water source or time
constraints that limit the potential for laundering and bathing at source or transporting water
home. As a result, the frequency of bathing and laundering may reduce, thus potentially
increasing the risks of some infectious diseases (Thompson et al. , 2001).224.10 Minimum requirements for all hygiene needs
The evidence suggests that water quantities used by households are primarily dependent on
access as determined by distance and/or time for collection. These differences are primarily
seen as functioning at four levels, broadly equivalent to service level, shown in table 6 below.
The estimated quantities of water at each level may reduce where water supplies are
intermittent and the risks of ingress of contaminated water into domestic water supplies will
increase.
Table 6: Service level descriptors of water in relation to hygiene
Service level
descriptionDistance/time
measureLikely quantities
collectedLevel of health concern
No access More than 1000m
or 30 minutes total
collection time.Very low (often less
than 5 l/c/d).Very high as hygiene not
assured and consumption needs
may be at risk. Quality difficult
to assure; emphasis on effective
use and water handling
hygiene.
Basic access Between 100 and
1000m (5 to 30
minutes total
collection time).Low. Average is
unlikely to exceed
20 l/c/d; laundry
and/or bathing may
occur at water
source with
additional volumes
of water.Medium. Not all requirements
may be met. Quality difficult to
assure.
Intermediate
accessOn-plot,  (e.g.
single tap in house
or yard).Medium, likely to be
around 50 l/c/d,
higher volumes
unlikely as
energy/time
requirements still
significant.Low. Most basic hygiene and
consumption needs met.
Bathing and laundry possible
on-site, which may increase
frequency of laundering. Issues
of effective use still important.
Quality more readily assured.
Optimal
accessWater is piped into
the home through
multiple taps.Varies significantly
but likely above 100
l/c/d and may be up
to 300l/c/d.Very low. All uses can be met,
quality  readily assured..
These levels of access can also be interpreted in terms of household water security. The no
access group effectively have no household water security as the quantities collected are low,
the effort taken to acquire water is excessive and  quality cannot be assured. The group with
basic access could be said to also have basic household water security, provided that water is
(reasonably) continuous and quality can be assured at source and protected during subsequent
handling.
The group with intermediate access can be said to have effective household water security as
sufficient water is available to meet domestic needs and quality can be assured. This may be
influenced by the degree of discontinuity within the supply, but it would be expected that
household coping strategies would include bulk storage, which has been shown to be
protective of health in Pakistan (van der Hoek e t al., 2002).  The group with optimal access23also have optimal household water security with quantity, quality and continuity all likely to
be adequate for domestic water needs.
The available data indicates that service level is more relevant to health than quantity of
water and provides an indication of the volume of water that is available and used by
households. The level of basic access is broadly equivalent to current definitions of minimum
quantities are water required for health (WELL, 1998) and intermediate access equivalent to
quantity of water that Gleick (1996) argued was the basic water requirement. In relation to
cost, the evidence available remains limited and contradictory, as does the evidence for
relationships between reliability and quantity of water. However, it is likely that both will
influence quantities of water collected in some settings and further research is required in this
area.
Available evidence suggests that health is significantly compromised at service levels
described as ‘no access’ in table 6 where volumes collected may barely exceed the minimum
for hydration. Estimates suggest that of the global population estimated in 2000 of 6 billion
people, around 1.1 billion are in a situation categorised as ‘no access’ within this paper.
Whilst significant health gains accrue to those 4.9 billion benefiting from ‘basic access’
significant health gains continue across categories ‘intermediate access’ and ‘optimal access’.
Approximately 2.8 billion of the global population presently have a household connection to
a water supply, which covers both the category of intermediate and optimal access.
A minimum for basic health protection corresponds to ‘basic access’ and experience shows
that this is equivalent to a water collection of less than 20 l/c/d, of which about 7.5 litres is
required for consumption. The effective use in hygiene practices of the limited water
available at basic access service level is important if available health benefits are to accrue.
The basic level of supply should be regarded as a minimum quantity of water and attention
paid to increasing levels of service to yard level in order to increase volumes of water
collected.
5 Other Uses of water and links to quantity 
5.1  Household productive uses of domestic water
This section deals with the productive uses of domestic water at a household level, which
includes brewing, small-scale food production and household construction in low-income
areas. We do not consider community-level enterprises that use water resources in income-
generating activities, such as irrigation systems (beyond simple use of water by a household
for gardening), industry, larger commercial entities, energy production and transport.
However, as noted in the introduction, in terms of overall use of water sources the economic
use of water typically greatly exceeds that used for domestic supply, but may compromise the
ability of the resource to meet basic needs (either through over-consumption or through uses
leading to quality deterioration).
The health sector oversight of water supply, has traditionally not considered productive uses
of water as important to control. However, it is increasingly recognised that productive uses
of water have particular value for low-income households and communities and have health
and well-being benefits (Thompson et al. , 2001). Direct health benefits are derived for
example from improved nutrition and food security from gardens crops that have been
watered. Indirect health benefits arise from improvements in household wealth from24productive activity. In urban areas, this often is essential for low-income communities to
meet nutritional requirements and may offer additional income from small-scale sales.
Fass (1993) notes that in families living in 'ultra-poverty' water could form anywhere between
1.5 and 10% of the total production costs in household enterprises. The removal of a water
supply, or deterioration in the quality of service, through decreased quantity or availability or
increased intermittence or cost may lead to further poverty among poor households using this
water for small-scale economic activities such as food production. The quality of water used
for productive processes needs to be suitable for domestic supply where it is used for
processing food for retail or in some circumstances irrigation for its production.
5.2 Amenity  uses of water
Amenity uses  are not typically considered in relation to health aspects of water quantity.
Amenity uses include lawn-watering and car washing, although in some cases the latter
would be more correctly categorised as productive uses of water as it may be used to provide
an income. There are some benefits of purely amenity uses of water in terms of quality of
life. However, particularly for the most vulnerable, amenity use of water is likely to be
limited.
The principal concern in relation to amenity uses of domestic water supplies is to reduce the
consumption of water for these purposes when this may place a significant demand on the
water supply such that universal basic access is compromised. This is a problem noted in
many developed countries where increasing efforts are being made to educate users on the
problems of use of water for such purposes and in some cases restrictions applied and
enforced to conserve water resources. Such approaches may include the use of variable tariff
rates that penalise excess use, although in this case care must be taken to ensure that there
would be no financial penalty for ensuring water for basic needs, including laundry.
Over-use of scarce water supplies for amenity uses is also found in developing countries,
particularly in urban areas where the patterns of use among the wealthy may directly impact
on the availability of water to the poor (Stephens, 1996). Therefore controlling amenity use of
domestic water supplies should be driven to ensure that basic needs are met throughout the
population in an equitable manner. It is important that such controls consider not only
meeting the basic needs for current populations, but also takes into account future population
growth. Furthermore, as many developing countries are either already experiencing or facing
water scarcity and water stress, the need to control consumption of water to conserve
resources is also critical ( Gleick, 1993).
6 Implications
The evidence reviewed and conclusions drawn have significant implications regarding the
development and application of norms for water quantity. This includes advocacy for access
not quantity, the monitoring and evaluation with progress in meeting international and
national goals for water supply, prioritising interventions and applications within specific
contexts, such as emergencies.
6.1 Changing the nature of the debate: household water security/access not quantity
The available evidence indicates that the quantity of water that households collect and use is
primarily dependent on accessibility (as determined by both distance and time). There is25some indication that cost and reliability may also influence quantity of water collected,
although the available evidence is limited and often contradictory.
The influence of accessibility operates as a function of service level, which can be divided
into the five categories shown table 6 above. It is therefore logical that the debate regarding
quantity is not related to volumes of water available but by the level of service provided.
Increases in quantities of water used will only be achieved through upgrading of service
level. Furthermore household water security improves with increasing service level, which
will contribute to reducing poverty.
The first priority for interventions to improve access to water supplies is to ensure that at least
basic access is achieved. At a basic level of service the volume of water collected is likely to
be around 20 litres per capita per day. There is no evidence that behaviour change
interventions have been successful in promoting increases in water quantities used in
households that have achieved basic access to improved water supply. At this level of service,
it is the effective use of the available water that is of principal importance, including the
importance and timing of hand and face-washing and household water treatment, in
controlling infectious disease transmission.  Once this level of access is achieved, attention
should be placed on providing guidance and support in hygiene practices and water quality
management techniques that will reduce the risk of diarrhoeal disease transmission.
Notwithstanding the emphasis on personal hygiene, further health gains are typically
associated with increasing levels of service - especially in upgrading to an ‘on plot’ level of
access and to a lesser extent when upgrading from this level to ‘multiple tap in house’.
Provision of ‘intermediate access’ levels of service will result in the use of approximately 50
litres of water per capita per day. ‘Optimal access’ will result in much higher quantities of
water being consumed and the emphasis may change to restriction on quantity used.
Upgrading to these levels of service therefore represent successive priorities, once basic
access is achieved.
Overall, many of the health benefits ultimately accrue from proper water usage and good
hygiene behaviours and simple provision of infrastructure alone is unlikely to maximise
health gains.  Poor hand-washing practice has been reported in countries with abundant in-
house water supplies and general availability of soap and interventions to improve hygiene
will usually provide some improvements in health in any setting, irrespective of socio-
economic conditions or service level.
In many developing countries, the challenge remains to improve overall system management
to reduce intermittence, make costs of water affordable and to develop incentives for users to
be willing to obtain a legal connection and to (Howard, 2001; Sansom et al. , 2000; WELL,
1998; World Bank, 1993). It may also require rethinking how services can be delivered to the
urban poor in particular and developing approaches to offering a range of technical options to
communities, community management and more effective financing of sector improvements
(Briscoe, 1996; Cotton and Tayler, 1994; Howard, 2001; Subramanian et al. , 1997; World
Bank, 1993).
6.2 International Development Targets
The UN (2000) set a Millennium Development Goal to 'halve the proportion of people who
are unable to reach or to afford safe drinking water by 2015' .26Ensuring access to the basic level of service represents the primary objective of the
Millennium Development Goal in relation to water, although the definition of the safety of
water remains unclear. In 2000,  this target was realised for the 82% of the global population
who had a improved water source within one kilometre of their home or a household
connection to a water supply. The remaining 18% (equivalent to about 1.1 billion people) are
in the category of no access and are found largely in Asia and Africa and particularly in  rural
populations which are typically less well served than urban populations (WHO and UNICEF,
2000). This suggests a priority on ensuring at least access basic access in rural areas.  It is
important to note, however, that the rapid growth in urban populations suggests that figures
for access in urban areas may reduce over time unless the pace of expansion of coverage is
maintained (WHO and UNICEF, 2000).
Where at least basic access is already assured for all, a priority is to increase the numbers of
households that reach the intermediate access level, where the evidence suggests further
major improvements in health are achieved ( Prüss et al. , 2002). Currently, only 47% of the
global population has access to this level of service, a figure significantly lower than global
access to improved sanitation of 60% (WHO and UNICEF, 2000).
Increasing  numbers of households in this category will result in significant public health
gains from likely better hygiene, maintenance of microbial quality of water and more time for
child-care, productive activity and schooling. Such access is likely to also require that the
supply is continuous, although there remains a dearth of direct evidence of the overall impact
of intermittence on public health ( Prüss et al. , 2002), although the risks in relation to
contamination of supplies are well known ( Regli et al. , 1993; Clark et al. , 1993). In many
urban situations, it may be possible to move from no access to intermediate access without an
intermediate phase of basic service level. Responding to local conditions and opportunities
will be more effective than developing generic blue-prints for service level upgrading.
The achievement of an intermediate level of water supply service may create additional
problems that will need to be addressed to maximise public health gains. Most notable are the
disposal of sullage and improvements in drainage around individual dwellings and in
communities. The presence of poorly drained water may lead to increased risks from insect
vector-related diseases, may increase the risk of exposure to pathogens, particularly for small
children who may play near or in water. It could potentially increase risks of schistosomiasis,
which has been noted as  an increasing problem in poorly drained urban areas (WHO, 1991).
Ensuring basic access to the currently unserved and increasing the numbers of people with
intermediate access are complementary activities. There remains no doubt that ensuring at
least a basic level of service remains a key international goal. At the same time, investment
should not focus solely on this level of access, but should also be targeted on addressing
moving increasing numbers of people to an intermediate  level of access.
6.3 Global Assessment
In the Global Water Supply and Sanitation Assessment 2000 Report, improved sanitation
types were all defined primarily at individual household levels, or at most shared by a few
neighbouring households. By contrast, most definitions of improved water supply were
defined as communal (basic access) levels of service.
If the definition of improved water supply were on-plot (intermediate access), which can be
justified on the basis on health evidence, water supply access is actually lower than sanitation27access. This has profound implications. Currently, there is rightly significant advocacy to
reduce the sanitation access deficit. However, the evidence suggests that continued attention
is required equally for improving services in both water supply and sanitation.
6.4 Emergencies and disasters
In emergency/disaster situations the provision of adequate safe water is of particular concern
in order to control the spread of infectious disease and in particular to prevent large-scale
outbreaks of disease. The provision of sufficient safe water for consumption and cooking is
an absolute requirement and should never be compromised.
The reference volume of 7.5 litres for consumption must be available for use within the
dwellings within an emergency context and the may the first goal in the first stages of an
emergency response. Short term decreases in volumes available for hygiene purposes may
have limited health implications provided effective use in hygiene, particularly handwashing,
is promoted.
The emergency response should include design to provide water for hygiene and it would be
rational to consider this in terms of service level in the same way as non-emergency
situations. In terms of estimating source volume requirements, it can be assumed that
provision of communal facilities will result in use of on average 20 litres per capita per day, if
taps are provided to individual dwellings this will increase to 50 litres per capita per day and
if multiple taps are provided this will increase further.
6.5 Quantity in health-based surveillance programmes
The role of the health sector in promoting better water supplies to maximise health gains
should be to advocate for those interventions that will deliver greatest improvements in
health. A key component of this role is the regular surveillance of water supplies in order to
assess progress with meeting targets consistent with stated public health goals and to identify
priority areas for intervention. WHO (1993) define surveillance as ‘ the continuous and
vigilant oversight of drinking water supplies from a public health perspective’ .
Water quantity has traditionally be viewed as forming a key indicator for such surveillance
programmes,  alongside measures of quality, cost, continuity and coverage (Howard, 2002 ;
Lloyd and Bartram, 1991; Lloyd and Helmer, 1991; WHO, 1997).  Elsewhere it has been
suggested that service level may be more appropriate ( Bartram, 1999).
This review indicates that service level is more closely related to health than the quantity of
water and also provides an indication of the likely volumes of water available and used by
households. Quantity data is also difficult to collect and are often aggregated (for instance at
community level) whereas  water quantity or availability is experienced at the household
level ( Bartram 1999). There may be a value in assessing volumes used by households with
higher service levels, in part to determine the influence their consumption has on users  at
basic level services. For such an approach to be useful, however, this must be matched
against a set of surrogate variables – for instance distance, time, cost or reliability – in order
for conclusions about a wider population to be drawn.
The literature suggests that some evaluation of the impact of cost and reliability of water
supply on quantities of water used would have value within a surveillance programme,
although this would not be expected to require frequent monitoring (Howard, 2002; Lloyd28and Bartram 1991). There appears little justification for collection of such data in relation to
distance, as the literature points to this only being significant between gross differences in
service level and of limited value for assessing within-group variation at basic and
intermediate level of service.
This indicates that estimates of access as described by service level and continuity in supply
provide the most meaningful insights into the adequacy of water supply for health protection
and can provide an indication of the quantities of water likely to be collected and used. This
data is easily obtainable using inventories of water sources and connections, sanitary
inspection of water supplies and water usage studies. There may be some value in collecting
data on quantities of water collected in relation to cost, although the likelihood of relationship
may depend on the availability of different types of water source. In situations where vendor
usage is more common there would appear to be a justification of assessments of volumes of
water collected.
7 Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the following for their constructive comments during the
preparation of this document:
Andy Bastable (OXFAM); Hamid Bakir (WHO-CEHA); Sandy Cairncross (London School
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine); Susan Murcott (Massachusetts Institute of Technology);
Amaka Obika (WEDC).
WHO Geneva: Richard Carr, Jose Hueb, Roisin Rooney.
8 References
Aiga H and Umenai T, 2002, Impact of improvement of water supply on household economy
in a squatter area of Maila, Social Science and Medicine , 55(4): 627-641.
Al-Ali F M, Hossain M M and Pugh R N H, 1997, The associations between feeding modes
and diarrhoea among urban children in a newly developed country,  Public Health , 111: 239-
243.
Almedom A and Odhiambo C, 1994, The rationality factor: choosing water sources according
to uses, Waterlines , 13(2): 28-31.
Bailey R, Downes B, Downes R and Mabey D, 1991, Trachoma and water use; a case-control
study in a Gambian Village, Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and
Hygiene , 85: 824-828.
Baltazar J C, Tigalo T V and Tempongko S B, 1993, Hygiene behaviour and hospitalised
severe childhood diarrhoea: a case-control study,  Bulletin of the World Health Organization ,
71(3/4): 323-328.
Bartram J, 1999.  Effective Monitoring of Small Drinking-water Supplies  in Providing Safe
Drinking-water in Small Systems,  Cotruvo A, Craun G and Hearne N ( Eds). CRC Press, Boca
Raton, USA, pp: 353-365.
Birmingham M E, Lee L A, Ntakibirora M, Bizimana F and Deming M S, 1997, A household
survey of dysentery in Burundi: implications for the current pandemic in sub-Saharan Africa,
Bulletin of the World Health Organization , 75(1): 45-53.
Bradley D, 1977, Health aspects of water supplies in tropical countries, In Feachem R,
McGarry M and Mara D, Water, wastes and health in hot climates , John Wiley and Sons,
Chichester, UK, pp 3-17.29Briscoe J, 1996, Financing water and sanitation services: the old and new challenges, Water
Supply , 14(3/4): 1-17.
Bukenya G B and Nwokolo N, 1991, Compound hygiene, presence of standpipe and risk of
childhood diarrhoea in an urban settlement in Papua New Guinea, International Journal of
Epidemiology , 20(2): 534-539.
Buttle M and Smith M,1996, Out in the cold: emergency water supply and sanitation in cold
climates.  WEDC, Loughborough University.
Cairncross S, 1987, The benefits of water supply, In Pickford, J (ed) Developing World
Water . Grosvenor Press, London.
Cairncross A M, 1990, Health impacts in developing countries: new evidence and new
prospects, Journal of the Institution of Water and Environmental Management , 4(6): 571-
577.
Cairncross S, 1993, Control of enteric pathogens in developing countries, In Mitchell R (ed)
Environmental microbiology . Wiley- Liss, New York, pp157-189.
Cairncross S and Kinnear J, 1992, Elasticity of demand for water in Khartoum, Sudan, Social
Science and Medicine , 34(2): 183-189.
Cairncross S and Feachem R, 1993, Environmental health engineering in the tropics: an
introductory text (2nd edition). John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, UK.
Carter R C, Tyrrel S F and Howsam P, 1997, The impact and sustainability of water and
sanitation programmes in developing countries, Journal of the Chartered Institution of Water
and Environmental Management , 13: 292-296.
Chan J, Knutsen S F, Blix G G, Lee J W and Fraser G E, 2002, Water, other fluids, and fatal
coronary heart disease, American Journal of Epidemiology , 155(9): 827-833.
Clark R M, Goodrich J A and Wymer L  J, 1993, Effect of the distribution system on
drinking-water quality, Journal of Water Supply Research and Technology – Aqua , 42(1): 30-
38.
Cotton A P and Tayler W K, 1994, Community management of urban infrastructure in
developing-countries,  Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers-Municipal Engineer ,
103(4): 215-224.
Curtis V, Cairncross S and Yonli R, 2000, Domestic hygiene and diarrhoea - pinpointing the
problem, Tropical Medicine and International Health , 5(1): 22-32.
Dufault A, 1988, Women carrying water: how it affects their health, Waterlines , 6(3): 23-25.
Emerson P M, Cairncross S, Bailey R L and Mabey D C W, 2000, Review of the evidence
base for the ‘F’ and ‘E’ components of the SAFE strategy for trachoma control, Tropical
Medicine and International Health , 5(8): 515-527.
Esrey SA, Feachem RG and Hughes JM, 1985, Interventions for the control of diarrhoeal
diseases among young children: improving water supplies and excreta disposal facilities,
Bulletin of the World Health Organization , 63(4): 757-772.
Esrey SA, Potash JB, Roberts L and Shiff C, 1991, Effects of improved water supply and
sanitation on ascariasis, diarrhoea, dracunculiasis, hookworm infection, schistosomiasis, and
trachoma, Bulletin of the World Health Organization , 69(5): 609-621.
Esrey SA, Habicht J-P and Casella G, 1992, The complementary effects of latrines and
increased water usage on the growth of infants in rural Lesotho,  American Journal of
Epidemiology , 135(6): 659-666.
Esrey S, 1996, Water, waste and well-being: a multi-country study, American Journal of
Epidemiology , 143(6): 608-623.
Fass S M, 1993, Water and poverty: implications for water planning, Water Resources
Research , 29(7): 1975-1981.
Food and Nutrition Board, 1989, Recommended dietary allowances 10th edition , National
Academy Press, Washington, DC.30Fewtrell L and Bartram J ( Eds) Water Quality: Guidelines, Standards and Health , World
Health Organization, IWA Publishing, London, UK.
Ford T E, 1999,  Microbiological safety of drinking water: United States and global
perspectives,  Environmental Health Perspectives , 107 (S1): 191-206.
Ghosh S, Sengupta P G, Mondal S K, Banu M K, Gupta D N and Sircar B K, 1997, Risk
behavioural practices of rural mothers as determinant of childhood dairrhoea,  Journal of
Communicable Diseases , 1: 7-14.
Gibbs S, 1996 Skin disease and socio-economic conditions in rural Africa: Tanzania
International Journal of Dermatology  35(9): 633-639.
Gilman R H, Marquis G S, Ventura G, Campos M, Spira W and Diaz F, 1993, Water cost and
availability: key determinants of family hygiene in a Peruvian shantytown, American Journal
of Public Health , 839(1): 1554-1558.
Gleick P H (ed.), 1993, Water in crisis: a guide to the World's freshwater resources . Oxford
University Press, New York, USA.
Gleick P H, 1996, Basic water requirements for human activities: meeting basic needs , Water
International, 21: 83-92.
Gorter A C, Sandiford P, Smith G D and Pauw J P, 1991, Water supply, sanitation and
diarrhoeal disease in Nicaragua: results from a case-control study, International Journal of
Epidemiology , 20(2): 527-533.
Grandjean A C, Reimers K J, Bannick K E and Haven M C, The effect of caffeinated, non-
caffeinated, caloric and non-caloric beverages on hydration, Journal of the American College
of Nutrition , 19(5): 591-600.
Haas C N, Rose J B and Gerba C P, 1999, Quantitative microbial risk assessment,  Wiley,
New York.
Herbert J, 1985, Effects of components of sanitation on nutritional status: findings from
South Indian settlements, International Journal of Epidemiology , 14(1): 143-151.
Hoque B A and Briend A, 1991, A comparison of local handwashing agents in Bangladesh,
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene , 94: 61-64.
Hoque B A, Mahalanabis D, Alam M J and Islam M S, 1995, Post-defecation handwashing in
Bangladesh: practice and efficiency perspectives, Public Health , 109: 15-24
Howard G, 2001,  Challenges in increasing access to safe water in urban Uganda: economic,
social and technical issues, In Craun , G F, Hauchman F S and Robinson DE, Safety of Water
Disinfection: balancing microbial and chemical risks , ILSI Publications, Washington, USA,
pp 483-499.
Howard G, 2002, Effective Approaches to Water Supply Surveillance in Urban Areas of
Developing Countries Guildford, Surrey, Surrey University, PhD Thesis.
Howard, G (ed), 2002, Water supply surveillance  - a reference manual . WEDC,
Loughborough University, UK.
Howard G, Teuton J, Luyima P and Odongo R, 2002, Water usage patterns in low-income urban
communities in Uganda: implications for surveillance, International Journal of Environmental
Health Research , 12(1): 63-73.
Howard G and Pond K, 2002, Drinking water surveillance programmes in the South-East
Asia Region: updated situation assessment and recommendations for future activity.
WHO/SEARO, New Delhi, India.
Hsieh Y-H, Bobo L D, Quinn T C and West S K, 2000, Risk factors for trachoma: 6-year
follow-up of children aged 1 and 2 years, American Journal of Epidemiology , 152(3): 204-
211.
Huttly S R A, Morris S S and Pisani V, 1997, Prevention of diarrhoea in young children in
developing countries, Bulletin of the World Health Organization , 75(2): 163-17431IPCS, 1994. Environmental Health Criteria 170:Assessing human health risks of
chemicals:derivation of guidance values for health-based exposure limites. WHO Geneva.
Jackonen S, 1997, Dehydration and hydration in the terminally ill: care considerations,
Nursing Forum , 32(3): 5-13.
Khan MU, 1982, Interruption of shigellosis by handwashing, Transactions of the Royal
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene , 76(2): 164-8
Kleiner S M, 1999, Water: an essential but overlooked nutrient. Journal of the American
Dietetic Association , 99 (2); 200-206.
Lloyd B and Helmer R, 1991, Surveillance of drinking water quality in rural areas.  Longman,
London.
Lloyd B and Bartram J, 1991.  Surveillance Solutions to Microbiological Problems in Water
Quality Control in Developing Countries.  Water Sci Tech 24(2): 61 – 75.
Luna E J A, Medina N H, Oliveira M B, De Barros O M, Vranjac A, Melles H H B, West S
and Taylor H R, 1992. Epidemiology of trachoma in Bebeduro State of Sao Paulo, Brazil:
Prevalence and risk factors, International Journal of Epidemiology , 21(1): 169-177.
Mackenzie W R, Hoxie N J, Proctor M E, Gradus M S, Blair K A, Peterson D E,
Kazmierczak J J, Addiss D G, Fox K R, Rose J B and Davis J P, 1994, A massive outbreak in
Milwaukee of Cryptosporidium infection transmitted through the public water supply, New
England Journal of Medicine , 331: 161-167.
Madanat S and Humplick F, 1993, A model of household choice of water supply systems in
developing countries, Water Resources Research , 29(5): 1353-1358.
Mara D D and Cairncross S, 1989, Guidelines for the safe use of wastewater and excreta in
agriculture and aquaculture: measures for public health protection , WHO, Geneva,
Switzerland.
Melian R, Mrlian N, Gouriev A, Moraru C and Radstake F, Groundwater quality and rural
drinking-water supplies in the Republic of Moldova, Hydrogeology Journal , 7:188-196.
National Institutes of Health, 2002, Medical Encyclopedia ,
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/ medlineplus
Neave N, Scholey A B, Emmett J R, Moss M, Kennedy D O and Wesnes K A, 2002, Water
ingestion improves subjective alertness, but has no effect on cognitive performance in
dehydrated healthy young volunteers, Appetite , 37(3): 255-256.
O'Connor R, 2002, Report of the Walkerton Enquiry, Part One: the events of May 2000 and
related issues (a summary) , Ontario Ministry of the Attorney General, Ontario, Canada.
Oo K N, Aung W W, Thida M, Toe M M, Lwin H H and Khin E E, 2000, Relationship of
breast-feeding and hand-washing with dehydration in infants with diarrhoea due to
Escherichia coli. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition , 18(2): 93-96.
Page B, 1996, Taking the strain - the ergonomics of water carrying, Waterlines , 14(3): 29-31.
Payment P and Hunter P R, 2001, Endemic and epidemic infectious intestinal disease and its
relationship to drinking water, In Fewtrell L and Bartram J (eds.) Water quality: guidelines,
standards and health,  IWA, London, pp 61-88.
Petersen E A, Roberts L, Toole M J and Peterson D E, 1998, The effect of soap distribution
on diarrhoea: Nyamithuthu refugee camp, International Journal of Epidemiology , 27: 520-
524.
Phillips P A, Rolls B J, Ledingham J G, Forsling M L, Moton J J, Crowe M J et al.et al..,
1984, Reduced thirst after water deprivation in healthy elderly men, New England Journal of
Medicine , 311: 753-759.
Pinfold J, 1990, Faecal contamination of water and fingertip rinses as a method for evaluating
the effect of low-cost water supply and sanitation activities on faeco-oral disease
transmission. II. A hygiene intervention study in rural north-east Thailand, Epidemiology and
Infection , 105: 377-389.32Prost A and Négrel A D, 1989, Water, trachoma and conjunctivitis, Bulletin of the World
Health Organization , 67(1): 9-18.
Prüss A and Mariotti S P, 2000, Preventing trachoma through environmental sanitation: a
review of the evidence base, Bulletin of the World Health Organization , 78(2): 258-264.
Prüss A and Havelaar A, 2001, The global burden of disease study and applications in water,
santiation and hygiene, In Fewtrell L and Bartram J ( eds) Water quality: guidelines,
standards and health , IWA, London, pp 43-59.
Prüss A, Kay D, Fewtrell L and Bartram J, 2002, Estimating the burden of disease from
water, sanitation and hygiene at a global level,  Environmental Health Perspectives , 110(5):
537-542.
Regli S, Rose J B, Haas C N, Gerba C P 1991 Modeling the risk from giardia and viruses in
drinking water Journal of the American Water Works Association  83(11): 76-84.
Rogers P J, Kainth A and Smit H J, 2001, A drink of water can improve or impair mental
performance depending on small differences in thirst, Appetite , 36(1): 57-58.
Rowe J W, Shock N W and DeFronzo R A, 1976, The influence of age on the renal response
to water deprivation in man, Nephron , 17: 270-278.
Roy R N and Sinclair J C, 1975, Hydration of the low birth-weight infant, Clinics in
Perinatology , 2(2): 393-417.
Sansom K, Coates S, Njiru C, Franceys R, 2000 Strategic marketing to improve both water
utility finances and services to poor urban consumers  WEDC Discussion Paper WEDC,
Loughborough.
Saywell D, 1999, Pollution from on-site sanitation - the risks? What risks? Waterlines , 17(4):
22-23.
Sazawal S, Bhan M J K, Clemens J and Bhatnagar S, 1991, Evidence for recent diarrhoeal
morbidity as a risk factor for persistent diarrhoea: a case control study, International Journal
of Epidemiology , 20(2): 540-545.
Shahid N S, Grenough W B, Samadi A R, Huq M I and Rhamn N, 1996, Hand washing with
soap reduces diarrhoea and spread of bacterial pathogens in a Bangladesh village, Journal of
Diarrhoeal Disease Research , 14(2): 85-89.
Sircar B K, Sengupta P G, Modal S K, Gupta D N, Saha N C, Ghosh S, Deb B C and Pal S C,
1987, Effect of handwashing on the incidence of diarrhoea in a Calcutta slum,  Journal of
Diarrhoeal Disease Research , 5(2): 112-114.
Smith A H, Lingas E O and Rahman M, 2000, Contamination of drinking-water by arsenic in
Bangladesh: a public health emergency, Bulletin of the World Health Organization , 78(9):
1093-1103.
Sobsey M, 2002, Managing Water in the Home: accelerated health gains form improved
water supply , WHO, Geneva, Switzerland.
Sphere Project, 2002, Humanitarian charter and minimum standards in disaster response,
OXFAM Publishing, Oxford, UK.
Stanton B F, Clemens J D, 1987 An education intervention for altering water-sanitation
behavior to reduce childhood diarrhea in urban Bangladesh II. A randomised trial to assess
the impact of intervention on hygienic behaviors and rates of diarrhea American Journal of
Epidemiology  125(2): 292-301.
Stephens C, 1996 Healthy cities or unhealthy islands? The health and social implications of
urban inequality  Environment and Urbanization  8(2): 9-30.
Subramanian A, Jagganathan N V and Meizen-Dick R, 1997, User Organizations for
sustainable water services , World Bank, Washington DC.
Thompson J, Porras I T, Tumwine J K, Mujwahuzi M R, Katui-Katua M, Johnstone N and
Wood L, 2001, Drawers of Water II: 30 years of change in domestic water use and
environmental health in East Africa , IIED, London, UK.33UNDP, 1999, Human Development Report 1999 , Oxford University Press, New York, USA.
United Nations General Assembly, 2000 Resolution 55/2: Millennium Declaration United
Nations, New York.
United States Army Center for Health Promotion and Preventive Medicine, 2003,
http://chppm-www.apgea.army.mil/ .
VanderSlice J and Briscoe J, 1995, Environmental interventions in developing countries:
interactions and their implications,  American Journal of Epidemiology , 141(2): 135-141.
Van der Hoek W, Feenstar SG and Konradsen F, 2002, Availability of irrigation water for
domestic use in Pakistan: its impact on prevalence of diarrhoea and nutritional status of
children , Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition, 20(1): 77-84.
WELL 1998, Guidance manual on water supply and sanitation programmes , WEDC,
Loughborough, UK.
West S, Lynch M, Turner V, Munoz B, Rapoza P, Mmbaga B B O and Taylor H R, 1989,
Water availability and trachoma,  Bulletin of the World Health Organization , 61(1): 71-75.
West S, Munoz B, Turner V M, Mmbaga B B O and Taylor H R, 1991, The epidemiology of
trachoma in central Tanzania, International Journal of Epidemiology , 20(4): 1088-1092.
West S, Munoz B, Lynch M, Kayongoya A, Mmbaga B B O and Taylor H R, 1996, Risk
factors for constant, severe trachoma among pre-school children in Kongwa, Tanzania,
American Journal of Epidemiology , 143(1): 73-78.
White G F, Bradley D J, White A U, 1972, Drawers of water: domestic water use in East
Africa , University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
WHO, 1985 Guidelines for drinking-water quality: Volume 1 Recommendations 1st edition.
WHO, Geneva., Switzerland.
WHO, 1991, Surface water drainage for low-income communities , WHO, Geneva,
Switzerland.
WHO, 1993, Guidelines for drinking-water quality: Volume 1 Recommendations  2nd edition,
WHO, Geneva (2nd edition) Switzerland.
WHO, 1996, Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality, Volume 2: Health and Supporting
Criteria 2nd edition, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland.
WHO, 1997, Guidelines for drinking-water quality, Volume 3: Surveillance and control of
community water supplies 2nd edition, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland.
WHO, 1999, Fluoride in drinking water (draft for consultation) , WHO, Geneva, Switzerland.
WHO, 2000, Health systems: improving performance, World Health Report, 2000,  WHO,
Geneva, Switzerland.
WHO, in finalisation, Guidelines for safe recreational water environments , WHO, Geneva,
Switzerland.
WHO and UNICEF, 2000, Global Water Supply and Sanitation Assessment 2000 Report ,
WHO/UNICEF, Geneva/New York.
World Bank, 1993, Water resources management, World Bank, Washington DC, USA.
Zerah M-H, 2000, Household strategies for coping with unreliable water supplies: the case of
Dehli,  Habitat International , 24: 295-307.
Zerihun N, 1997, Trachoma in Jimma Zone, South Western Ethiopia, Tropical Medicine and
International Health , 2(12): 1115-1121.